@chapter GNUstep DBusKit Framework 0.2

I'm happy to announce a new release of DBusKit, the GNUstep D-Bus bindings
framework. The framework allows Objective-C applications to access the
D-Bus inter-process communication system.

@section Where to get it
You may obtain the code for this release from the GNUstep GitHub
organisation at:

@url{https://github.com/gnustep/libs-dbuskit/releases/0.2}

@c Alternatively, a compressed archive for this release is available at the
@c following address:
@c
@c @url{http://downloads.gna.org/gnustep/dbuskit-0.1.tar.bz2}
@c
@c The integrity of the archive can be verified using the following
@c OpenPGP signature:
@c
@c @url{http://downloads.gna.org/gnustep/dbuskit-0.1.tar.bz2.asc}

@section How to build it
For instructions on how to build DBusKit, please refer to the
@samp{INSTALL} file in the framework source.

@section What is it good for?
The DBusKit framework offers tight integration of D-Bus services into
Objective-C applications. It handles all low-level details of
communication with D-Bus daemons and the services connected to them and
exposes an interface similar to Distributed Objects to make it easy for
Objective-C programmers to access D-Bus services.

@section What's new?

@itemize @bullet
@item The notification center class has been extended to support sending
signals to other D-Bus services.
@item A bundle implementing user notifications via D-Bus for
gnustep-base.
@item An implementation of Canonical's global menu protocol for use
with GNUstep's Gtk theme.
@end itemize

@section Deprecation notice

This is the last release of DBusKit that officially supports the GCC
Objective-C compiler and the accompanying runtime library. Future
releases will require clang and the GNUstep Objective-C runtime.

@section Where do I send bug reports?

Bug reports are highly appreciated. You can log bug reports on the
@uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep,GNUstep project page}
or send them to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.


@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 2017 Free Software Foundation

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.
@end ifinfo

