@chapter GNUstep DBusKit Framework 0.1

This is the first public release of DBusKit, the GNUstep D-Bus bindings
framework. The framework allows Objective-C applications to access the
D-Bus inter-process communication system.

@section Where to get it
You may obtain the code for this release from the GNUstep subversion
repository at:

@url{svn://svn.gna.org/svn/gnustep/libs/dbuskit/tags/0.1}

Alternatively, a compressed archive for this release is available at the
following address:

@url{http://downloads.gna.org/gnustep/dbuskit-0.1.tar.bz2}

The integrity of the archive can be verified using the following
OpenPGP signature:

@url{http://downloads.gna.org/gnustep/dbuskit-0.1.tar.bz2.asc}

@section How to build it
For instructions on how to build DBusKit, please refer to the
@samp{INSTALL} file in the framework source.

@section What is it good for?
The DBusKit framework offers tight integration of D-Bus services into
Objective-C applications. It handles all low-level details of
communication with D-Bus daemons and the services connected to them and
exposes an interface similar to Distributed Objects to make it easy for
Objective-C programmers to access D-Bus services. Highlights of the
initial release include:

@itemize @bullet
@item Distributed Objects-like API for exchanging messages with D-Bus
services.
@item A notification center class for watching signals emitted by D-Bus
services.
@item @samp{dk_make_interface} tool to generate Objective-C protocol
declarations from D-Bus interface files.
@end itemize

@section Where do I send bug reports?

DBusKit is a relatively new framework and will certaintly contain bugs.
Reporting them is always appreciated. You can log bug reports on the
@uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep,GNUstep project page}
or send them to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.


@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Free Software Foundation

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.
@end ifinfo

