@chapter Installation Instructions

@section Required software

As an Objective-C framework, DBusKit depends on recent versions of the
GNUstep Makefile Package and the GNUstep Base Library. Versions 2.4.0
and 1.20.0 (respectively) are known to work. D-Bus support is provided
by libdbus. DBusKit has been verified to work with version 1.2.1 of
libdbus, but might work with earlier versions. Some advanced features (e.g.
generating D-Bus interfaces from Objective-C headers) require libclang. Usage
of libclang can be disabled by passing the ``--disable-libclang switch'' to
the configure script. To build the testsuite, the UnitKit framework is required.
It is available from the Étoilé
@uref{https://github.com/etoile/UnitKit/,repository}.

Please note that UnitKit requires the
@uref{https://github.com/gnustep/libobjc2,GNUstep Objective-C runtime} and the
clang compiler. Clang is also required to build the included user notification
bundle. The global menu bundle can only be built if gnustep-gui is available.

@itemize @bullet
@item gnustep-make (>=2.4.0)

@item gnustep-base (>=1.22.0)

@item libdbus (>=1.2.1)

@item gnustep-gui (required only for global menu bundle)

@item clang (required only for user notification bundle)

@item libclang (optional)

@item UnitKit (optional)

@end itemize

@section Build and Install
To build and install DBusKit type @kbd{make install}. This will
automatically configure the framework prior to building and installing.
DBusKit will usually tell your compiler to treat warnings as errors, if
you don't want that behaviour, add the @kbd{nonstrict=yes} flag to your
@kbd{make}-invocation.

@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 2017 Free Software Foundation

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.
@end ifinfo

